Hey everyone, welcome back to the
channel. Uh, for those of you who may be
new here, I'm Evan. I'm a former
metastaf engineer and I'm the current
co-founder of hello.com.
If you're currently preparing for
software interviews, and you probably
are if you landed here, then head over
to Hello Interview. We have just about
everything that you could possibly need,
the overwhelming majority of which is
totally free. Uh, in this video though,
we're going to be covering message cues
and specifically, as always, in the
context of system design interviews. And
so, we're going to start with a
motivating example that'll show you why
QES exist in the first place. And then
we'll talk all about what a message cube
actually is, how it works under the
hood, when you should use one, and then
finally, we'll get into those deep dives
that interviewers love to probe into
things like scaling, back pressure,
ordering, durability, all of that good
stuff. So, without further ado, let's
get after it. Let's start things off
with a little motivating example. I want
you to imagine that you're building a
photo sharing app like Instagram. So,
the user uploads a photo to your server
and then it needs to do a bunch of stuff
with that photo. And so, for example,
you may need to resize it into multiple
different resolutions. You may need to
apply filters, maybe run some kind of
content moderation checks in the
background to make sure that it's
appropriate, it's not nudity, those
sorts of things. And each of those
operations takes a couple of seconds
each. In the simplest possible
architecture that you could design, what
might happen here is that the client
uploads the photo to your server and
then your server does all of that work
synchronously. That single server
handles all of that work. Resizing the
images, applying the filters, running
the moderation checks, and then once all
of that's done, and only once all of
that's done, it returns the response
back to the client with the success
message.
This this works kind of uh but it has
some real limitations. The the first is
latency. The user hits upload and then
they just stare at a spinner or whatever
you put on the client while all of that
processing is happening and they're just
waiting. Nobody wants to have to wait
six seconds just to get that
confirmation that they're they're they
uploaded their photo, right? The second
problem is around how fragile this is.
What happens if the filter service maybe
crashes halfway through all of that
processing? Well, the whole upload now
fails. Now the user ends up getting an
error with a message maybe to retry and
that resizing work that we already did
is now totally lost too and we have to
start from scratch. And then the third
one is is a big one. How do you manage
really bursty traffic? So, imagine that,
for example, your app gets featured in
the app store. Super cool. Um, but now
your uploads spike from what was maybe
50 a second to 5,000 or 50,000 or
500,000 a second. And your servers, they
can't handle more than maybe 200 per
second. And so those other 4,800,
right, they're just timing out or
they're failing or the user gets an
error. your system is basically falling
over under the load because it can't
handle this new huge throughput.
So with all of that in mind, let me show
you how we can solve each of these
problems by introducing a message cue.
Instead of processing that photo
immediately, what if when that upload
comes in, your server just saves the
file and writes a message to a queue.
The message is something simple like,
"Hey, photo 456 needs processing." And
then our server can immediately respond
back to the client saying that it's
done. The upload's complete from the
client's perspective. And we can show
them maybe the single resolution photo
just to them while the rest is
processing in the background. Because at
the other end of the queue, you have a
pool of workers, maybe a worker servers,
right? Where each worker is pulling one
of those messages at a time off of the
queue and processing it. So if three
photos get uploaded around the same
time, each one gets picked up maybe by a
different worker on the other end of
that queue called consumers. And they'll
all be able to process in parallel. So
we can look at what happens in this case
to our three problems. Now uploads are
fast because your server is just saving
the file and dropping it onto a message
queue. It's not doing the expensive
processing. Failures are isolated
because if a worker crashes while
processing a single photo, that message
just gets redelivered to another worker
and it picks up where the other one left
off. And then on those big traffic
spikes, it just means that the queue
gets a little bit deeper, right? There's
more items in the queue. And so the
messages sit there potentially waiting
to be processed. So at worst, there's a
delay, but none are dropped or aired
out. All right, now let's formalize what
we just saw. What actually is a message
Q? Well, it's pretty much exactly what
it sounds like. A message Q is just a
buffer, a queue that sits between a
producer and a consumer. The producer is
the thing or the server, the service
that creates the work. In our example,
this was that server handling the upload
from the client. And the consumer is the
thing that actually does the work. In
our case, this was that pool of workers
that process the photos. The way it
works is really straightforward. The
producer sends a message to the queue
and then totally forgets about it. It
doesn't care when or even if the message
gets press processed at all. That's not
its responsibility. It just fires and
moves on. On the other end, the consumer
pulls messages off the queue and
processes them at its own pace. So the
Q's whole job is just to hold on to
these messages until somebody is ready
to deal with them. It's just a buffer in
between the two services. The key
property here is called decoupling. The
producer and the consumer don't know
about each other. They don't need to.
And so this allows you to scale them
independently and swap one or the other
without affecting each other directly.
You need more consumers, fine. You can
add more servers there while leaving the
producers where they were. you need more
producers, you can scale those up while
leaving, you know, the one or two
consumers that you had. Um, to wrap up
this this kind of intro on what is a
message cue, uh, and I'll al albe it
kind of silly analogy that I remember
from school, which may help you, and
I've seen this click for candidates, is
to think of it like a kitchen. The
waiter takes your order and then puts it
on the ticket rail. The cook grabs the
ticket off of the rail when they're
ready, and the waiter doesn't just stand
there waiting the waiting for the cook
to make your food. instead they go and
they serve other tables, right? And so
the ticket rail decouples the front of
the house from the back of the house
exactly the same way a message Q does
for our producers and our consumers,
right? Pretty straightforward example.
Okay, now that we know what a message Q
is, let's talk a little bit about how it
actually works under the hood. Uh
there's a few mechanisms that you need
to understand and each one solves real
problems. So let's start off with with
acknowledgements. Let me give you a
scenario. A worker pulls a message off
of the queue and it starts processing
the photo. Halfway through the worker
crashes for whatever reason. It runs out
of memory. Anything can happen here. And
so what would happen to that message?
Well, if the queue just deleted the
message the moment the worker grabbed
it, then that photo is now gone and it
will never get processed. That user that
user's upload is basically just lost
forever. Uh which would clearly be be
really bad. This is what
acknowledgements solve. When a consumer
pulls the message off of the queue, the
queue doesn't delete it right away.
Instead, the consumer has to explicitly
send an acknowledgement or an act back
to the queue saying, "Hey, I'm done with
this one. You can go ahead and actually
delete it now." So, if a consumer
crashes before sending that act, the que
assumes it wasn't processed and it ends
up just being redelivered. That message
ends up being redelivered to another
consumer so that nothing was actually
lost. Great. So, the the Q holds on to
messages until consumers act them,
right? acknowledge them. Um, but think
about what this actually means, and you
may have already thought this or
recognized this. While worker A is busy
processing a message and it hasn't acted
yet because it's in its 4 seconds of
doing all of that processing, then that
message is technically still in the
queue. So, what's stopping worker B from
grabbing it, too? And then you'd have
two workers doing the exact same work,
which is wasteful at best, and in some
cases maybe even even dangerous or hurts
the state of your system. Now, different
queuing systems solve this exact problem
different ways. In SQS, which is
Amazon's native message queue, when a
consumer picks up a message, it becomes
invisible to all other consumers for a
configurable window, like say 30
seconds. And so, if the consumer
finishes and it acts within that window,
then all good, the message was removed.
If it doesn't, the message becomes
visible again automatically and another
consumer can retry. So, it's basically
like a 30-se secondond window or a
configurable time period. um where we we
don't let consumers um double process a
message. CFKA on the other hand, they
take a pretty different approach though.
They just assign each partition, we'll
talk about what those are in a second,
to exactly one consumer in a group, so
that there's no even competition in the
first place. There's only one consumer
ever reading from any given logical
queue, if you will. And then Rabbit MQ,
another popular message Q that we'll
talk about at the end, they use channel
level prefetch limits and act timeouts
to manage this. So, we won't get into
all those details, but what's good for
you to know is just that um all of these
cues have a way to prevent duplicate
processing. And whatever your queue of
choice is, it might be worth looking up
how exactly they do that. So, while the
implementations differ, the concept is
always the same. Every queuing system
just needs a way to make sure that a
message is only being actively processed
by one consumer at a time. Okay. But
even with axe and that duplicate uh
message prevention, there's still a
tricky edge case that I want to make you
guys aware of. So what if the worker
processes the message successfully, but
then crashes right before that moment,
it sends the acknowledgement. It sends
the act. Now the queue thinks that it
was never processed, so it redelivers it
to another consumer. And that same photo
gets processed twice. And maybe in our
case, when you're just resizing photos
and running content moderation, that
doesn't matter at all. Doing that twice
has has no bad effect. But what if the
message was something like, "Charge Evan
$50 for a banking application or
something." Um, that duplicate message
now just resulted in me being charged
$100. And and that's obviously not cool.
Um, this is the problem that's referred
to as we talk about message cues as
delivery guarantees. And there are three
that you should know about and that your
interviewer might ask about. The first
and by far the most common delivery
guarantee is called at least once
delivery. This just means that the Q
guarantees that every single message
will be delivered at least one time, but
it might be delivered more than once.
The implication of this is that your
consumers now need to be what's called
item potent. Item potent just means that
processing the same message twice will
produce the exact same result. Let me
give you an example. If your message
says set user 123's profile photo to
photo 5, then running that twice is
fine. You get the exact same result. The
first time you ran it, it set it to
photo five. The second time you run it,
it just set it to photo five again,
which it already was, so no big deal.
But like we saw with that earlier
message or with the banking example, if
your message is something like increment
user 123's post count by one, then
running that twice is a problem. You've
now obviously incremented their post
count by two. And so in practice, you
design your operations to be naturally
item potent like in a photo example or
you check whether the action has already
be been completed before doing it again.
And so if we if we take that example of
increment user 123's post count by one,
the message or the work would actually
be uh update user 123's post count to 54
where 54 was what it was before plus
one. Right? That way running it twice
the outcome is always still 54. Um, now
this at least once delivery with item
potent consumers. This is almost always
the right answer both in production and
in your interview. So if your
interviewer asks what you're going to
use, it's almost always the right answer
to say I'm going to have at least once
uh delivery guarantees and I'm going to
make sure that my consumers are item and
potent. The second delivery guarantee is
what's called at most once. And this is
basically just fire and forget. So a
consumer takes a message off of the
queue, we immediately delete it off the
queue at that moment. if something goes
wrong, you know, at most one guy
processed it. Uh, at worst, nobody
processed it. And so, you really only
want to use this for things like
analytics events or metrics where losing
a few data points is totally acceptable.
You have to be able to accept the loss
if you use at most once. And then the
third one is the holy grail. It's
exactly once. Uh, this is that every
message is processed exactly one time as
it says, right? Uh the reality is that
true exactly once delivery is extremely
hard to achieve in distributed systems.
CFKA supports a form of it for specific
patterns within its own ecosystem. But
it comes with real trade-offs and
limitations. And so my honest advice to
you is don't promise exactly once in
your interview unless you can explain
the mechanism and defend it. At least
once with those item potent consumers is
the safer and frankly the more practical
answer and what is almost always used in
production. Now that we understand a
little bit about how Q's work and what
goes on under the hood, the next
question is when should you actually
reach for one? Well, there's four
signals that you should end up looking
for that may lead you to introduce a
queue in your interview. And these are
very similar to the motivating example
that we started with. The first one is
that async work. And so this is when a
user doesn't need an immediate result
like sending an email, generating a
report, processing uploads, all those
things that we talked about. Um the
litmus test is really simple. Ask
yourself, does the user need the result
of this operation right now or can they
wait a little bit? If the answer is no,
then it's a great candidate to put it in
a queue and have a worker process it
asynchronously. The second is the bursty
traffic. Like we saw in our example, you
need to absorb spikes in traffic without
dropping any requests. And so the queue
is there to kind of smooth out the load
by acting as a buffer and just
accumulating a backlog of work that the
consumers can get to, you know, when
they have time or they have resources.
Third is decoupling. This is your
producer and consumer might have
completely different scaling or hardware
needs. Going back to our image
processing example, the upload services
are super lightweight. They just accept
the file, drop it into a message queue,
but the workers doing the actual
processing might need GPUs or beefy
machines with lots of memory. And so
with a queue between them, you can scale
and provision each side independently.
You're not forced to run expensive GPU
instances just to handle uploads. This
can make it more costefficient.
And then the fourth one is reliability.
When you just can't afford to lose work.
So if a downstream service is
temporarily unavailable, the queue holds
on to that message until it comes back
online. And you make sure that you never
lost anything.
One thing that I do want to call out
just really quickly because I see it in
quite a few interviews, especially with
junior and mid-level candidates, and
it's be careful introducing a queue into
a synchronous workload. It just doesn't
belong there. So, if you have strong
latency requirements in your
non-functional requirements, like sub
500 millisecond response times to get an
answer, by adding a queue, you've nearly
guaranteed that you're going to break
that constraint. Not only do you have a
bunch of complexity on figuring out how
to get that message back to the clients
in the first place, but you've broken
that latency constraint almost entirely
by the nature of the way that these
systems work. So again, cues are for
that work that you can afford to do
later, even if later is a few seconds
from now.
Okay, now let's get into some of those
deep dives. This is everybody's favorite
part, right? The things that the
interviewers really love to dig into
once you introduce a queue into your
system. So, it's really important that
you're prepared for these questions,
right? You just drew a message queue on
the whiteboard. Here's what the
interviewer might come at you with.
Okay, so the first one's about scaling.
They might say, "How does your queue
handle the increased throughput or
handle increasing throughput?" And what
you need to recognize here is that a
single queue can only handle so much.
When you need more, you do what's called
partition. And partitioning just means
splitting the queue into multiple
independent sequences or like kind of
sub cues of messages. Different workers
can then process different partitions in
parallel so that your throughput scales
horizontally with the number of
partitions. So by splitting into
multiple cues, I'm putting that in
quotes just because we're kind of uh
conflating terminology here, but
multiple partitions, thus multiple
logical cues, you can have multiple
consumers consuming from the same time
and thus increased the throughput. Um on
the consumer side, you have what are
called consumer groups. And a consumer
group is just a pool of workers that
divide those partitions amongst
themselves. So if you have six
partitions and three consumers in a
group then each consumer can handle two
partitions. You need to go faster. Well
then you can add more consumers. Now the
um importantly there is a ceiling here.
You can't have more consumers than you
have partitions. If you have six
partitions and six consumers adding a
seventh doesn't help you here because
there's no partition left for that new
consumer to consume from. And hopefully
that makes sense.
Now, really importantly, the partition
key, which is how you decide which
message goes into which of these
partitions, is really, really important.
It's analogous to choosing a shard key
or partition key in a database. And it
matters for two main reasons. The first
is ordering. Messages with the same
partition key always go to the same
partition. And within a partition,
ordering is guaranteed because they're
sitting in that same subq. So imagine
again that you're you're processing that
bank transaction example we brought up.
A user maybe deposits $100 and then
withdraws $50. Clearly they should be
able to do this. They put $100 into the
bank. Now they want to take 50 out. If
those two messages though ended up on
different partitions,
then the withdrawal could get processed
first and now it's rejected because at
that moment maybe the account is empty,
right? And so by using account ID as the
partition key now both that both of
those messages will land on the same
partition because they're pertain to the
same account. They'll be in the right
order and they'll get processed in that
right order where we add the 100 before
we take away the 50. Right? And then the
second one that's important about
choosing your partition key is the even
distribution. You want your partition
keys to spread work ac across these
partitions pretty evenly. You can
imagine that if you're building like a
ride sharing application and your
partition by city then now New York City
is going to be excuse me New York City
is going to be absolutely slammed while
Boise sits there maybe getting nothing
right and so that's what we call of
course a hot partition and you'd
probably want to partition by something
more evenly distributed like a right ID
so that you don't have that hot
partition where you have one consumer
doing all the work where another
consumer is just sitting there waiting
because it's just watching Boise and
there's nearly as many Uber rats, right?
Um, there's of course a real trade-off
here, though, and it's one that you
might discuss in your interview, and
it's that the key that gives you
ordering might not always be the key
that gives you the best distribution.
And so, choosing the right partition key
here is one of those decisions that's
worth really spending some time in your
interview thinking through the
consequences on those two factors,
ordering and distribution.
The the next deep dive that interviewers
love to ask is what happens if your
producers outpace your consumers. So if
your producers are creating messages
faster than your consumers can process
them, the crew the the the queue just
grows and grows and grows and grows and
grows, right? And the queue doesn't
solve a capacity problem. It just delays
it. It's just buying you time. If you
receive 300 messages per second, but
your consumers can only handle 200, that
queue is growing at a 100 messages every
single second and you'll never be able
to catch up. Eventually, you'll run out
of memory on that queue and things are
going to go wrong. So, what do you do or
what can you do? There's a couple
things. The first of course is scaling.
You can you can add autoscaling and a
lot of the uh cloud providers provide
autoscaling where you monitor the queue
depth and when it starts to grow too
much you spin up more consumers so that
you can consume quicker or you can even
add additional partitions to the queue.
But the second one and the one that
interviewers are oftent times looking
for is to apply what's called back
pressure to the producers themselves.
And so slow the producers down.
Basically start either rejecting
messages or maybe returning an error to
the client saying, "Hey, we're a little
overloaded right now. Please try again
in a minute." And then the third and
maybe the bare minimum is that you
should just be setting alerts of course
on your QEP so that you know when
something like this is happening. It's
good to have the monitoring and the
alerting here. Um
be ready be ready to discuss this one.
Interviewers want to know that you
understand that a Q isn't just magic,
right? It's a buffer, not a solution to
insufficient capacity.
Moving on. Uh, sometimes a message just
fails to process. And so your
interviewer might ask you, what happens
when a message fails to process? Maybe
the image file is corrupted or the
downstream service is temporarily
unavailable. That's fine. It happens,
right? So, think about our photo upload
example. What if I just uploaded a
corrupted photo? It will never succeed.
No matter how many times you try, it
will continue to fail. And this is a
really common problem and it's what's
called with message cues a poisoned
message. Sounds maybe scarier than it
is, but it's just a malformed or
problematic message that crashes the
consumer every single time and there's
no recovering from it. So without guard
rails, it's going to retry forever. And
meanwhile, everyone else is just stuck
behind it waiting. It's just consuming
all the resources of the given consumer
indefinitely.
To solve this, most queuing systems,
they let you configure a max retry
count. The message gets tried, tried,
tried again, maybe five, six times. And
if it still hasn't succeeded after five
tries, instead of retrying forever, you
shunt it and you put it to a dead letter
Q or a DLQ. And a DLQ is just a separate
Q or sometimes even just a separate
partition where failed messages go so
that somebody can inspect them later and
figure out what went wrong. Meanwhile,
the main queue keeps moving. So if this
is failing, don't put it back into the
main queue. put it somewhere else where
we can just wait and maybe an admin
comes in later to see what's going on
there and try to fix those, right? Or
nowadays an AI model. Um, mentioning
this proactively in your interview is
great. It shows that you have a bunch of
seniority. It shows that, hey, I'm going
to have a limit on retries. I'm going to
add a dead letter Q here. Um, this shows
that you can understand those those
failure scenarios.
Now, speaking about failure scenarios,
what about the ultimate failure
scenario? What happens if the Q goes
down? Um, and this is a question about
durability and fault tolerance,
especially if that was in your
non-functional requirements. It's
something that you're going to want to
talk about. And it's good to know that
modern message cues, at least some of
them like CFKA, they persist messages to
disk and they can replicate them across
multiple brokers. It's what it's called
in the CFKA ecosystem, but these are
just different servers. So if one broker
goes down, another replica has that data
just like with read replicas with
databases. Same concept. So in this way,
no messages are lost. Uh, CFKA in
particular is interesting here because
it stores messages on disks with a
configurable retention window. So you
could keep messages around for say a
day, a week, even forever if you wanted
to and you had the capacity. And what
this means is that you actually can
replay messages from the past too, which
is a really powerful recovery scenario.
Uh, if you need to reprocess data after
kind of something went down, you have a
new new version of a consumer. And so
you can imagine that your consumers go
down for a while, they're offline for an
hour, your queue, your CFKA queue is
just backing up. No big deal. Because
when your consumer comes back on, it can
start to just take all of those things
again. Even more so, if that consumer
was broken and it processed things
incorrectly, well, we can just put a new
consumer in, tell that consumer, hey,
reprocess back from an hour ago, even
though the messages were consumed. Um,
and we can kind of fix what we broke.
Speaking of CFKA, let's maybe quickly go
through what are the most common message
Q technologies. You certainly don't need
to know all of these for your interview.
Um, but you should have at least one
that you're comfortable talking about.
If you don't have a default already,
choose CFKA. It's kind of like the
interviewing industry standard. Um, but
let me walk you through a couple of
them. Of course, starting with CFKA.
CFKA is probably the most widely used
and it's the one that I said I'd
recommend. Um, it's a distributed
streaming platform that can act as both
a message cue and a stream processing
system. So, it's built for really high
throughput. It's durable because of what
we talked about. It writes messages to
disks. And then it scales via
partitions. Right? When we're talking
about partitions, that's how CFKA works.
It also supports those consumer groups.
But one thing that makes CFKA a little
different from a traditional queue is
that messages aren't removed directly
after they're consumed. So this was that
example where you want to replay
messages in case something some code in
the consumer changed, right? In CFKA,
they stick around for those retention
periods. So multiple consumer groups can
read from the same data independently
and you can replay messages if you need
to. Like I said, um
the second one I'm going to call out,
and we have this in our written
breakdowns quite a few times, is SQS.
This is Amazon simple Q service. It's
the AWS hosted ecosystem version of a
message Q. Um it's simple, it's fully
managed, there's no infrastructure you
need to worry about. It comes basically
in two flavors. A standard Q which gives
you the best effort ordering and really
high throughput or FIFO cues which give
you strict ordering but at a lower
throughput. So SQS is a great choice
when you want something really
straightforward, you don't need more
advanced features and your interviewer
is cool with you pulling uh hosted
solutions from cloud providers.
The last one that that I'll mention is
Rabbit MQ. And RabbitMQ is a more
traditional message broker and it
supports complex routing patterns
through what it calls exchanges and
bindings. Obviously, I'm not going to
have time to get into that here, but
it's all the same underlying con uh
concepts. It's maybe less common in
system design interviews if I'm going to
be honest with you. I hear it less, but
it might be worth knowing that it exists
uh especially in cases where you need
some sophisticated message routing
logic. So, to wrap things up in this
section, if you don't already have a
go-to, pick CFKA. It's the most
versatile. If you want just hyper
simplicity in the AWS ecosystems around,
SQS is great. It has that visibility
timeout thing that we had mentioned
earlier. Uh it has the option for
ordering guarantees or looser guarantees
but higher latency.
All right, there you have it folks. Um
hopefully you found this useful. Just a
really quick recap. Message cues
decouple your producers from your
consumer. They buffer bursty traffic so
nothing gets dropped. They distribute
work across pools of workers. Um, you
should know when to use them, know the
pitfalls, be specific and detailed when
you bring things up. Um, any questions,
anything that you think I got wrong, go
ahead and please drop those in the
comments. I respond to as many of those
as I can. Uh, you'll have the Excal
drawings that I use in this video down
in the description as well. So, go ahead
and check that out. You'll also have my
LinkedIn. Connect with me, send me a
message. Again, I respond to as many of
those as I can get to as well. I love
hearing from you all, especially if you
have a success story to share from your
interviews. I'd love to celebrate with
you. Uh most importantly, good luck with
the upcoming interviews. You guys are
going to do great. You're going to nail
it. You're putting in the work. Uh and
I'll see you soon.